# Announce: Rakudo Perl 6 compiler, Development Release #94 (“коледа”)

On behalf of the Rakudo development team, I’m proud to announce the
Christmas release (December 2015) of Rakudo Perl 6 #94 “коледа”. Rakudo
is an implementation of Perl 6 on the Moar Virtual Machine[^1] and the
Java Virtual Machine.

This is the Christmas release of Rakudo Perl 6. This version of the compiler
targets the v6.c “Christmas” specification of the Perl 6 language. The
Perl 6 community has been working toward this release over the last 15 years.

The tag for this release is “коледа”, a slavic word for an ancient winter
festival that has been incorporated into Christmas. We hope you join us
in our celebration of getting our Christmas release shipped!

While we are extremely happy to ship an official Perl 6 release, this is not
the end of Rakudo’s development. We will continue to ship monthly releases,
which will continue to improve performance and our user’s experience. We’ll
also continue our work on the specification, with feedback from the community.

The tarball for this release is available from <http://rakudo.org/downloads/rakudo/>.

Please note: This announcement is not for the Rakudo Star
distribution[^2] --- it’s announcing a new release of the compiler
only. For the latest Rakudo Star release, see
<http://rakudo.org/downloads/star/>.

The Rakudo Perl compiler follows a monthly release cycle, with each
release named after a Perl Mongers group. This month’s release is named after
the Bend chapter, because we’re nearly around the bend with the upcoming
Christmas release.

Some of the changes in this release are outlined below:

New in 2015.12:
   + Christmas!

These are only some of the changes in this release. For a more
detailed list, see “docs/ChangeLog”.

The development team thanks all of our contributors and sponsors for
making Rakudo Perl possible, as well as those people who worked on
the design docs, the Perl 6 test suite, MoarVM and the specification.
Additionally, the Pugs, Parrot, and Niecza projects were all instrumental
with their contributions to the specification and the community.

The following people contributed to the development of the Christmas release;
We’ve gone back through the logs of all the various projects.  Thanks to
everyone who has worked to make this release happen over the past 15 years. We
would also like to thank everyone who submitted bug reports or dropped in on
the various forums to discuss things.  Finally, we’d like to extend a special
thanks to everyone who we accidentally left out of this list.

唐鳳 (Audrey Tang),
ab5tract,
abcxyzp,
David H. Adler,
Chirag Agrawal,
Bilal Akhtar,
Julian Albo,
Alekssasho,
Paul C. Anagnostopoulos,
andreoss,
Joji Antony,
Daniel Arbelo Arrocha,
Christian Bartolomäus,
Martin Berends,
Ronald Blaschke,
Kristof Bogaerts,
Kresimir Bojcic,
Dan Bolser,
Jürgen Bömmels,
Konrad Borowski,
Christopher Bottoms,
Matt Boyle,
Fernando Brito,
Geoffrey Broadwell,
Leon Brocard,
Nathan Brown,
Roger Browne,
Philippe Bruhat (BooK),
Klaus Brüssel,
Tim Bunce,
Carlin,
Nuno 'smash' Carvalho,
Piers Cawley,
Vasily Chekalkin,
Nicholas Clark,
Paul Cochrane,
Will "Coke" Coleda,
cono,
Géraud Continsouzas,
Simon Cozens,
Tyler Curtis,
cygx,
David Czech,
Akim Demaille,
Justin DeVuyst,
Matt Diephouse,
donaldh,
Andy Dougherty,
Ingy döt Net,
Jonathan Scott Duff,
Andrew Egeler,
Fitz Elliott,
ennio,
Aaron Faanes,
David Farrell,
Steve Fink,
Solomon Foster,
Mike Francis,
Kent Fredric,
John Gabriele,
Christoph Gaertner,
Martin von Gagern,
Jerry Gay,
Brian Gernhardt,
Alessandro Ghedini,
Peter Gibbs,
Tanton Gibbs,
Nick Glencross,
Mark Glines,
GlitchMr,
Simon Glover,
Jeff Goff,
Alex Gough,
Léo Grange,
Bruce Gray,
Daniel Grunblatt,
Sterling Hanenkamp,
Ask Bjørn Hansen,
John Harrison,
Austin Hastings,
Carl Hayter,
Florian Helmberger,
Felix Herrmann,
Jarkko Hietaniemi,
Michael H. Hind,
Joshua Hoblitt,
Rob Hoelz,
Masahiro Honma,
Jeff Horwitz,
Tom Hughes,
Tristan Hume,
Donald Hunter,
isBEKaml,
Joshua Isom,
Akash Manohar J,
Heiko Jansen,
Paul Johnson,
Jumpyshoes,
Yoshikuni Jujo,
Josh Juran,
Luben Karavelov,
Amir Karger,
Alexander Kaurov,
kboga,
James E Keenan,
Cole Keirsey,
Zohar Kelrich,
Mikhail Khorkov,
Daehyub Kim,
Damian Miles Knopp,
Adrian Kreher,
Matthias Krull,
Kamil Kułaga,
Bob Kuo,
Colin Kuskie,
Brent Laabs,
Mike Lambert,
Tobias Leich,
Moritz Lenz,
Andy Lester,
Jonathan "Duke" Leto,
LLFourn,
David M. Lloyd,
Peter Lobsinger,
Nick Logan,
luben,
lue,
Nolan Lum,
lumimies,
Noel Maddy,
Carl Mäsak,
Tokuhiro Matsuno,
Matthew,
Elizabeth Mattijsen,
mdinger,
Kevin Metcalf,
Patrick R. Michaud,
Alexander Moquin,
mr.Shu,
muraiki,
Paweł Murias,
Markus Muschol,
Steve Mynott,
Nami-Doc,
Salve J. Nilsen,
Ben Noordhuis,
NotFound,
Paweł Nowak,
Dmitriy Olshevskiy,
Christoph Otto,
Stefan O'Rear,
Pawel Pabian,
Luke Palmer,
Nova Patch,
Timo Paulssen,
Stéphane Payrard,
Stéphane Peiry,
Felipe Pena,
Wenzel P. P. Peppmeyer,
François Perrad,
Clinton A. Pierce,
Gerd Pokorra,
Peter Polacik,
Kevin Polulak,
Gregor N. Purdy,
purl,
Jerome Quelin,
Gerhard R,
Peter Rabbitson,
Florian Ragwitz,
raiph,
Matt Rajca,
Prog Rammer,
Allison Randal,
Curtis Rawls,
raydiak,
Jens Rehsack,
Charles Reiss,
Jens Rieks,
John Rizzo,
Andrew Robbins,
Amos Robinson,
Bob Rogers,
ronaldxs,
David Ross,
Brent Royal-Gordon,
Sam Ruby,
Daniel Ruoso,
Sam S,
Chip Salzenberg,
Siddhant Saraf,
Sasho,
Matt Schallert,
Bernhard Schmalhofer,
Ronald Schmidt,
Michael Schroeder,
Andreas Schwab,
Pepe Schwarz,
Calvin Schwenzfeier,
Michael Scott,
Stefan Seifert,
Filip Sergot,
Sgeo,
Kris Shannon,
Kyle Shannon,
ShimmerFairy,
Ricardo Signes,
Alberto Manuel Brandao Simoes,
skids,
Arne Skjærholt,
Mike Small,
Melvin Smith,
Tim Smith,
smls,
snarkyboojum,
soh_cah_toa,
Vishal Soni,
Tadeusz Sośnierz,
Sue Spence,
Cory Spencer,
Robert Spier,
John Spurr,
Michael Stapelberg,
Edwin Steiner,
Michael Stevens,
Klaas-Jan Stol,
Jonathan Stowe,
Pascal Stumpf,
Dan Sugalski,
Marek Šuppa,
Jakub Sygnowski,
Gabor Szabo,
Jesse Taylor,
tcurtis,
Kevin Tew,
tkob,
Marcel Timmerman,
Graham Todd,
Leopold Toetsch,
Daniel Toma,
Nat Tuck,
Ben Tyler,
u0097636@kuleuven.be,
Reini Urban,
Ilmari Vacklin,
vendethiel,
Cédric Vincent,
Jesse Vincent,
Max Vorobev,
Martin Vorländer,
VZ,
Mariano Wahlmann,
Larry Wall,
Lewis Wall,
Stephen Weeks,
Nick Wellnhofer,
Brian Wheeler,
Andrew Whitworth,
Bart Wiegmans,
Brock Wilcox,
Josh Wilmes,
Matthew Wilson,
Jonathan Worthington,
Xtreak,
Alvis Yardley,
Natan Yellin,
Tony Young,
Ahmad M. Zawawi,
Ruslan Zakirov,
Jimmy Zhuo,
Zoffix Znet

If you would like to contribute or find out more information, visit
<http://perl6.org>, <http://rakudo.org/how-to-help>, ask on the
<perl6-compiler@perl.org> mailing list, or ask on IRC #perl6 on freenode.

The next release of Rakudo (#95), is tentatively scheduled for 16 January
2016. A list of the other planned release dates is available in the
“docs/release_guide.pod” file.

The development team appreciates feedback! If you’re using Rakudo, do
get back to us. Questions, comments, suggestions for improvements, cool
discoveries, incredible hacks, or any other feedback -- get in touch with
us through (the above-mentioned) mailing list or IRC channel. Enjoy!

[^1]: See <http://moarvm.org/>

[^2]: What’s the difference between the Rakudo compiler and the Rakudo
Star distribution?

The Rakudo compiler is a compiler for the Perl 6 language.
Not much more.

The Rakudo Star distribution is the Rakudo compiler plus a selection
of useful Perl 6 modules, a module installer, the most recent
incarnation of the “Using Perl 6” book, and other software that can
be used with the Rakudo compiler to enhance its utility. Rakudo Star
is meant for early adopters who wish to explore what’s possible with
Rakudo Perl 6 and provide feedback on what works, what doesn’t, and
what else they would like to see included in the distribution.
