# Announce: Rakudo Perl 6 compiler, August 2015 scheduled release

On behalf of the Rakudo development team, I'd like to announce that we have
skipped the regularly scheduled release planned for August 2015.

The team has been working hard on finishing the GLR (Great List Refactor)
which is one of the last disruptive changes planned before we are able to
release a candidate that might be eligible for Christmas. Many of our
developers were able to get together and work on this and other items
at the recent Swiss Perl Workshop, but the schedule of the workshop and
the amount of work involved made it difficult to complete the work in time
for the scheduled August release.

Our plan now is to include the work done as part of the GLR in the *next*
scheduled monthly release. We will also remove all the functionality that
has been deprecated - we've been warning about this for some time, and
we want to give the module ecosystem a chance to deal up with these last set
of disruptive changes before the Christmas release this year.

Thank you for your patience as we work to bring you the best version of
Perl 6 that we can.

Rakudo is an implementation of
Perl 6 on the Moar Virtual Machine[^1] and the Java Virtual Machine. 

The development team thanks all of our contributors and sponsors for
making Rakudo Perl possible, as well as those people who worked on
the design docs, the Perl 6 test suite, MoarVM and the specification.

If you would like to contribute, see <http://rakudo.org/how-to-help>,
ask on the <perl6-compiler@perl.org> mailing list, or ask on IRC #perl6
on freenode.

The next release of Rakudo (#91), is scheduled for 17 September 2015.
A list of the other planned release dates and code names for future
releases is available in the "docs/release_guide.pod" file. A Rakudo
development release typically occurs a few days (often two) after the
third Tuesday of each month.

The development team appreciates feedback! If you're using Rakudo, do
get back to us. Questions, comments, suggestions for improvements, cool
discoveries, incredible hacks, or any other feedback -- get in touch with
us through (the above-mentioned) mailing list or IRC channel. Enjoy!

[^1]: See <http://moarvm.org/>
