# Announce: Rakudo Perl 6 compiler, Release #126 (2018.09)

On behalf of the Rakudo development team, I’m very happy to announce the
September 2018 release of Rakudo Perl 6 #126. Rakudo is an implementation of
Perl 6 on the Moar Virtual Machine[^1].

This release implements the 6.c version of the Perl 6 specifications.
It includes bugfixes and optimizations on top of
the 2015.12 release of Rakudo.

Upcoming releases in 2018 will include new functionality that is not
part of the 6.c specification, available with a lexically scoped
pragma. Our goal is to ensure that anything that is tested as part of the
6.c specification will continue to work unchanged. There may be incremental
spec releases this year as well.

The tarball for this release is available from <https://rakudo.org/files/rakudo>.

Please note: This announcement is not for the Rakudo Star
distribution[^2] — it’s announcing a new release of the compiler
only. For the latest Rakudo Star release, see
<https://rakudo.org/files/star>.

The changes in this release are outlined below:

New in 2018.09:
  + Fixes:
    + Made native arrays throw when storing lazy Seq [fc8c7f84][bb963a25]
    + Fixed smartmatching of Seqs against Iterables [d3cac14e]
    + Made it possible to emit Mu [3f10e2d1][db3768e3]
    + Fixed setting of `$/` when matching NDF [cf1df1d7]
    + Fixed prefix calls with `.:< ... >` on integer literals [ec366c30]
        [1835f280]
    + `.Array` on shaped arrays now returns a proper `Array` instead of
        dying [efbd58c8]
    + Fixed `.keys` on one-dimensional native shaped arrays [5a9105ae]
    + Made `Parameter.twigil` also work on dynamic Parameters [39f2d68a]
    + Made sure the decoder is detached when closing handles [b07874e0]
    + Made sure `X` handles empty lists on RHS [6c93fde8]
    + Various improvements to produced messages [d419a313][c8db35e3]
  + Additions:
    + Added a `PredictiveIterator` role for `Iterator`s that can
        determine how many values can still be generated, without
        actually generating them [3ffacb9f][5cbbcc6e][842d4b32]
        [78ae9028][000ac81e][c2c9df1c][cdf65305][ad64c757][eefbe6e1]
        [da663afd][e717e21b][ca5825b4]
    + Added `use isms <C++>` and make `use isms` assume all available
        "isms" (now 'Perl5' and 'C++') [57f89278][c6c2b6c4][528def48]
    + Partially implemented Pod '#' alias for %config :numbered [b4bf1660]
    + Added utf16 decodestream and file handle write support [8fcebb86]
        [e8a7564d][0bf909bb][d275ea09]
  + Efficiency:
    + Made `Str.words` about 3x as fast [b8f37bfc]
    + Made `Str.lines` about 2x as fast [3dd09be3]
    + Made `IO::Handle.lines` about 1.2x as fast [874ec002][d198c1b7]
    + Made `IO::Path.lines` about 1.1x as fast [1905838c]
    + Made `Str.chop(N)` about 5x as fast [07089e89]
    + Made `Str.(r)index(needle,pos)` about 1.2x as fast [5d1d792a]
    + Improved `.elems` and `.Bool` on `Seq` by adding
        `count-only`/`bool-only` methods [89055755][86468e1e][070780e0]
        [64ddacab][9738dfbf][d1e80dfe][9ff17367][b1c645ed][bd832061]
        [708ff624][5f3c2bfc][2a011a0e][faed3a9c][e73e3ecc][78bebc7a]
        [d970c2b3][f5ebad98]
  + Internal:
    + Moved some iterators from Range to `R::Iterator` [fcd45ff8]
    + Streamlined quoted words handling [92951168][ae739adf]
    + Fixed a bug in the optimizer where optimizations were
        improperly combining [e436f4e5]
    + Simplified `Map.kv` iterator [6977973d]
    + Replaced use of `p6bool` by `hllbool` and `hllboolfor` [672196cd]
        [20feda70][170ffd40][7e69c640][3272207a][f1f6825b]
    + Removed obsolete p6settypes extop [de4e8225]
    + Standardized use of proto's on `.STORE` methods [ed9b48de]
    + Removed EmptySeq [a4db33e7]


The following people contributed to this release:

Zoffix Znet, Elizabeth Mattijsen, Paweł Murias, Bart Wiegmans,
Samantha McVey, Stefan Seifert, Jeremy Studer, Timo Paulssen,
Aleks-Daniel Jakimenko-Aleksejev, Will "Coke" Coleda, Daniel Green,
Tom Browder, MorayJ, Naoum Hankache, Nick Logan, Ben Davies, Curt Tilmes,
David M. Cawthon, Lichtkind, Luis F. Uceta, 陈梓立, Alexander, Daniel Mita,
Itsuki Toyota, Jonathan Stowe, Jonathan Worthington,
Juan Julián Merelo Guervós, Robert Lemmen, Steve Mynott, Tobias Boege

If you would like to contribute or find out more information, visit
<https://perl6.org>, <https://rakudo.org/how-to-help>, ask on the
<perl6-compiler@perl.org> mailing list, or ask on IRC #perl6 on freenode.

Additionally, we invite you to make a donation to The Perl Foundation
to sponsor Perl 6 development: <https://donate.perlfoundation.org/>
(put “Perl 6 Core Development Fund” in the ‘Purpose’ text field)

The next release of Rakudo (#127), is tentatively scheduled for 2018-10-20.

A list of the other planned release dates is available in the
“docs/release_guide.pod” file.

The development team appreciates feedback! If you’re using Rakudo, do
get back to us. Questions, comments, suggestions for improvements, cool
discoveries, incredible hacks, or any other feedback – get in touch with
us through (the above-mentioned) mailing list or IRC channel. Enjoy!

Please note that recent releases have known issues running on the JVM.
We are working to get the JVM backend working again but do not yet have
an estimated delivery date.

[^1]: See <http://moarvm.org/>

[^2]: What’s the difference between the Rakudo compiler and the Rakudo
Star distribution?

The Rakudo compiler is a compiler for the Perl 6 language.
Not much more.

The Rakudo Star distribution is the Rakudo compiler plus a selection
of useful Perl 6 modules, a module installer, Perl 6 introductory
documentation, and other software that can be used with the Rakudo
compiler to enhance its utility.
