=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Guide to the C<src/setting/> library

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Why we write built-in methods and functions in Perl 6, and what you
should know when you write more such subs or methods.

=head2 Reasons

There are a few reasons to write built-in methods in Perl 6 and not in
PIR, as done previously:

=over

=item Perl 6 is a much nicer language than PIR

=item Typed Arrays/Lists are really parametric roles, and those are
    much easier to write in Perl 6

=item In order for Rakudo's multi-dispatchers to work properly,
    the target subs have to have Signature objects attached to them.
    This is far easier to do in Perl 6 than in PIR.

=back

There are two potential drawbacks:  (1) slower execution, and (2)
some operations can be expressed in PIR that cannot yet be expressed
in Rakudo (and sometimes not even in Perl 6!).  For cases where these
drawbacks matter, we can use inline PIR or maintain the subroutines
in PIR as needed.  

=head2 Guidelines

Your patches to migrate PIR builtins to Perl 6 are very welcome,
especially if they follow these guidelines:

=over

=item Think of lazyness

At some point in the hopefully not-so-distant future Lists will become
lazy by default. So you should try to avoid anything that forces eager
evaluation of arrays, like querying their length.

This is bad:

    while $i < self.elems { ... }

Better use a C<for> loop, which will respect lazyness

    for self.list { ...  }

If you assemble multiple items into a potentially lazy list,
C<gather/take> is a very good construct to remember.

=item Take care with type constraints

Some of the Synopsis documents list type constraints for some of the
arguments, including the invocant. They are not always correct,
when in doubt leave them out.

=item When adding a new file in src/setting/

... remember to add it to L<build/Makefile.in> to the C<SETTING>
variable and re-generate the Makefile using L<Configure.pl>.

=item Prefer C<self> to explicit invocant variables.

Many of the method specifications in the synopses list explicit
invocant variables.  Using them often makes the code less clear,
and can sometimes be incorrect (for example, an invocant of C<@values>
will restrict the method to invocants that have the C<Positional>
role).  Better is to use C<self>, or if invoking a method on C<self>
then you can use C<$.foo> or C<@.bar> directly.

=item All subs and methods are really multis

All built-in methods or subroutines should be declared as C<multi>. 

=item Use explicit empty signatures

If a method doesn't take any arguments, give it an explicit empty
signature C<()>. That's very different from omitting the signature
alltogether (which would be an implicit caatch-all signature).

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<http://rakudo.org/2009/02/rakudo-built-ins-can-now-be-wr.html>

L<http://perlgeek.de/blog-en/perl-6/tidings-2009-03.html>

=for editor vim: ft=pod tw=70
